
AKATHIST TO THE M OST HOLY T HEOTOKOS
Page 1 of 8
Kontakion 1, 8th Tone
To Thee, the Champion Leader, we Thy servants dedicate a feast of victory and of thanksgiving as
ones rescued out of sufferings, O Theotokos: but as Thou art one with might which is invincible,
from all dangers that can be do Thou deliver us, that we may cry to Thee: Rejoice, O Unwedded
Bride!
Ikos 1
An archangel was sent from Heaven to say to the Theotokos: Rejoice! And beholding Thee, O
Lord, taking bodily form, he was amazed and with his bodiless voice he stood crying to Her
such things as these:
Rejoice, Thou through whom joy will shine forth:
Rejoice, Thou through whom the curse will cease!
Rejoice, recall of fallen Adam:
Rejoice, redemption of the tears of Eve!
Rejoice, height inaccessible to human thoughts:
Rejoice, depth undiscernible even for the eyes of angels!
Rejoice, for Thou art the throne of the King:
Rejoice, for Thou bearest Him Who beareth all!
Rejoice, star that causest the Sun to appear:
Rejoice, womb of the Divine Incarnation!
Rejoice, Thou through whom creation is renewed:
Rejoice, Thou through whom we worship the Creator!
Rejoice, O Bride Unwedded!
Kontakion 2
Seeing herself to be chaste, the holy one said boldly to Gabriel: The marvel of thy speech is difficult
for my soul to accept. How canst thou speak of a birth from a seedless conception? And She cried:
Alleluia!
Ikos 2
Seeking to know knowledge that cannot be known, the Virgin cried to the ministering one: Tell me,
how can a son be born from a chaste womb? Then he spake to Her in fear, only crying aloud thus:
Rejoice, initiate of God's ineffable will:
Rejoice, assurance of those who pray in silence!
Rejoice, beginning of Christ's miracles:
Rejoice, crown of His dogmas!
Rejoice, heavenly ladder by which God came down:
Rejoice, bridge that conveyest us from earth to Heaven!
Rejoice, wonder of angels sounded abroad:
Akathist to the Most Holy Theotokos Page 2 of 8
Rejoice, wound of demons bewailed afar!
Rejoice, Thou Who ineffably gavest birth to the Light:
Rejoice, Thou Who didst reveal Thy secret to none!
Rejoice, Thou Who surpassest the knowledge of the wise:
Rejoice, Thou Who givest light to the minds of the faithful!
Rejoice, O Bride Unwedded!
Kontakion 3
The power of the Most High then overshadowed the Virgin for conception, and showed Her
fruitful womb as a sweet meadow to all who wish to reap salvation, as they sing: Alleluia!
Ikos 3
Having received God into Her womb, the Virgin hastened to Elizabeth whose unborn babe at once
recognized Her embrace, rejoiced, and with leaps of joy as songs, cried to the Theotokos:
Rejoice, branch of an Unfading Sprout:
Rejoice, acquisition of Immortal Fruit!
Rejoice, laborer that laborest for the Lover of mankind:
Rejoice, Thou Who givest birth to the Planter of our life!
Rejoice, cornland yielding a rich crop of mercies:
Rejoice, table bearing a wealth of forgiveness!
Rejoice, Thou Who makest to bloom the garden of delight:
Rejoice, Thou Who preparest a haven for souls!
Rejoice, acceptable incense of intercession:
Rejoice, propitiation of all the world!
Rejoice, good will of God to mortals:
Rejoice, boldness of mortals before God!
Rejoice, O Bride Unwedded!
Kontakion 4
Having within a tempest of doubting thoughts, the chaste Joseph was troubled. For knowing
Thee to have no husband, he suspected a secret union, O blameless one. But having learned that
Thy conception was of the Holy Spirit, he said: Alleluia!
Ikos 4
While the angels were chanting, the shepherds heard of Christ's coming in the flesh, and having run
to the Shepherd, they beheld Him as a blameless Lamb that had been pastured in Mary's womb, and
singing to Her, they cried:
